---
template: BlogPost
path: /with-code
date: '2021-01-20T07:08'
title: Meditation<>Habituation
thumbnail: /assets/image-2.jpg
---
My first idea for my master's thesis in Cognitive science was on the 
effects of meditation. There's been quite some interest from the cogsci 
community towards the long term effects of meditation. Various theories 
and experiments point towards, better syncronization of brain waves 
beetwen brain regions; optimizing or increasing (somehow) attentional 
resources; I didn't continute with the research because I didn't have 
enough experence meditating to be able to exlain it well enough or to 
have a solid starting point. But the question remained. 

Why do meditators always look so calm?

5 years later:
I've been meditating daily for a year now. I tried different methods - 
mindfulness, transcendental meditation and a bit of zazen. I wouldn't 
set any intention I'd just stay in silence for these 20 min and 
meditate. 
Recently I noticed that over time I'd start repsponding differently to 
agitating triggers.

Something that used to affect my whole day, over time would irritate 
me only for a few hours after it happened. Then it would irritate me 
only while it's happening. Then it would amuse me. Then I'd aknowledge 
it's there, but feel nothing. Then I'd be able to come up with a 
creative or compassionate solution or just let it be. It would take a 
few months or a few weeks depending on the thing, but it would slowly 
happen. 

That reminded me of something. 
There are these experiments: when you shock a slug with a small electric
 shock it would retrieve. If you touch it again with the rod even with 
no electricity - it would retrieve expecting to be shocked again. But 
over time if you keep touching it with no electricity it would stop 
retrieving. It has learned that the rods are not a threat anymore. In 
Scientific speak this mechanism is called habituation. The physiological
 phenomenon where over time there is a decreased reaction to a certain 
stimuli. It's been suggested to be one of the building blocks in 
learning. It's faguely similar to "habitual - making something into a 
"habit" but not the same. 

Back to my meditation. What would happen in my mind: 
While meditating all of a sudden a stressful thought or a memory would 
pop up. That would activate a visceral responce. I'd get this 
uncomfortable tention in my stomach. Then my mind would start racing: 
"Damnit! What a stupid mistake" - going into a downward spiral of self 
blame/blame others etc. But as meditation suggests once you catch 
yourself doing that - "just go back to attending your breath" / "favour 
the mantra" / "acknowledge that though and let it flow away". So I'd do 
ecaxtly that - relax back into meditation. 

Over time I'd still get angry and visceral-ly at things, but it woud 
be at different things, different problems. The older ones wouldn't 
bother me that much. 

So could it be that what's happening during meditation is also 
habituation among other things? Our troubling thoughts bubble up to the 
surface of our mind while we're in this calm state which helps habituate
 them into a less threathening stimulus.  

Maybe we should be exploring the amygdala-prefrontal cortex communication to understand meditation better?

Food for thought. Or research.
